[Music]
hello and welcome history buffs my name
is Nick Hodges and join me on a trip to
the Windy City the birthplace of the
untouchables it is 1930 in prohibition
Chicago and this once peaceful streets
have turned into an active war zone that
has fought over by brutal gangs each
vying for power in the illegal
bootlegging trade the most dominant is
the Southside gang led by the infamous
mobster Al Capone his violent rise to
power has made him think he's above the
law and for good reason with all the
cops judges and politicians in his
pockets no one has dared cross him yet
that was until a prohibition agent
called Eliot Ness and his elite team
single-handedly took him down at least
that's what happens in the movie history
on the other hand paints a completely
different picture one that I will share
the course of this review and piece by
piece we will uncover the true story
behind the untouchables
[Music]
[Applause]
now before I get into the untouchables I
thought be a good idea to tell a bit of
the history behind prohibition and how I
was able to lead to the rise of
organized crime in Chicago between 1920
and 1933 a constitutional ban was set in
place to abolish the production
distribution and sale of alcohol within
the United States a president soon this
time called Herbert Hoover once
described prohibition as the great
social and economic experiment but
unbeknownst to him it was one that
America was destined to fail by the dawn
of the 20th century a grassroots social
movement was making waves in the
political landscape it's deeply tied
religious beliefs viewed alcohol as a
blight on America's morality a condemned
its consumption as the sole reason
behind all its woes it was known as the
temperance movement and from the very
beginning it was women who had helped
champion the cause many of them had seen
firsthand the destructive role alcohol
plays within their families and
marriages whether it been as victims of
domestic abuse or to witness their
alcoholic fathers and husbands spent
away their life savings the women's
Christian Temperance Union was amongst
the first to successfully push through
the idea of temperance into the public
eye that began dividing Americans with
its politics into two camps the wets and
the dries with the wet supporting the
consumption and sale of alcohol whilst
the Dreyse didn't a prominent figure
head to the dries was a man named Wayne
wheeler who is the leader of a temperate
society called the anti-saloon League
which is by far the most effective
unlike the WCTU it was an organization
made up of both men and women and as far
as his policies were concerned the total
ban of alcohol was the only thing they
cared about the anti-saloon League was
able to rise to power by directing his
devout followers to vote for politicians
who supported them and vote against the
ones who didn't the league wasn't
interested whether they were Democrats
or Republicans as long as they play to
their fiddle there were guaranteed votes
even if that meant those politicians
were privately drinkers themselves a
huge turning point of the drys came in
April 1917 when America entered the
first world war the anti-saloon League
the WCTU and other temperance societies
banded together to exploit an anti
German hysteria that was gripping the
nation they did this by pumping up
propaganda specifically targeting German
American beer makers suddenly drinking
beer brands like Schlitz Miller flats or
Busch was made to seem like an act of
treason with public opinion on their
side the anti-saloon League pushed
Washington to institute a temporary
wartime prohibition in order to save
grain for the war effort this was a huge
win for the dry activists but they went
even further by proposing a prohibition
amendment to Congress they didn't just
want a law passed to ban alcohol as laws
could be repealed or changed the drys
wanted it to be immortalized into the
American Constitution as no amendment
had ever been repealed before then and
so on August 1st 1917 the United States
Senate voted 65 to 20 in favor of the
18th amendment the House of
Representatives followed shortly
afterwards and largely voted in favor on
December 18th 1917 in an effort to stave
off prohibition the wet supporters in
Congress had previously made a deal with
the drys granting them only six years to
received the support for 3/4 of the
United States for final approval they
had no idea it would only take 11 months
it was ratified into law on January 16
1919 and went into effect just a year
later and so when the stroke of midnight
began to approach On January 16 1920
people began to wonder would prohibition
finally put an end to the nation's
thirst for alcohol
[Applause]
[Music]
as the temperance movement padded
herself on the back for a job well done
it hopes for a dry America was naively
mistaken enforcement of the law on the
rural areas and small towns which they
sprang was easy since many in those
communities had long since been
sympathetic to the idea of temperance
but who enforced that same law in the
big cities was another thing entirely
now before it gets into that I would
like to briefly talk about the law then
forced prohibition itself known as the
Volstead Act it forbade the manufacture
sale and transportation of intoxicating
beverages this includes everything from
beer wine to heart spirits but the
consumption of these beverages wasn't
legal in itself and in the alcohol
that's purchased before prohibition was
also legal to own this gave private
clubs and the super-rich an entire year
to buy as much boost they could cram
into their cellars and anyone who can
afford to do so could still enjoy a
drink from their local bootleggers as
long as they didn't get caught buying it
but even the criminals stood a good
chance of never doing hard time
ironically the same people who supported
prohibition were also the types who
didn't believe in big government
spending three of America's presidents
in the 1920s were warren g harding
Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover all
three were Republican and their parties
dominated Congress they had all the
power that could possibly want and yet
they spent as little money as they could
on enforcing prohibition here's an
example for you the federal law
enforcement agency those formed to
enforce the Volstead Act was called the
Bureau of prohibition however it only
had 1500 agents assigned to cover the
entire country
that's one agent for every 70,000
Americans
I guess they just hoped everyone follow
the honor system or more accurately the
states and small local governments would
be kind enough to pick up the bill
themselves but they of course argued why
should they this is a federal law after
all and that the federal government was
so eager to pass it in the first place
then they should be the ones to pay for
it so you get the situation where
everyone is just buck passing the
responsibilities and lisslow gets
resolved but while all this was going on
the criminal underworld was making a
mockery of the Volstead Act despite
early signs of success the start of
Prohibition with a decline of public
drunkenness and a 30% drop in alcohol
consumption the decade that followed saw
a new generation rise up and brazenly
break this new law the conservative
parents had thrust upon them and the
scofflaws they were called did so not by
visiting the saloons at the past but at
the speakeasy underground bars and clubs
that were hidden by a secret door if you
had the right password you were let in
by a doorman and if he visited the
largest of these venues then you were
treated to a glorious night of
entertainment with jazz band playing out
the greatest hits of the 20s - flappers
dancing away on the ballroom floor and
the finest alcohol you could possibly
afford nothing within these walls
indicated that prohibition was working
at all in fact it was the era's worst
kept secret
local law enforcement often tolerated
these establishments seeing alcohol as a
harmless vice with some being customers
themselves
but mainly the reason why was because
they were bribed to look the other way
corruption was a huge problem within
many police departments and none were
more so than in Chicago
throughout prohibition no City Wizards
notorious bootlegging at Chicago and no
man more infamous in its trade than
Alphonse Scarface Capone this
brooklyn-born mobster would dominate the
headlines for years to come
when the 18th amendment first came into
effect thousands of breweries and
distilleries across America were forced
to close seizing the opportunity Capone
and his old mentor Johnny Torrio started
buying the ones in and around Chicago by
controlling production and supplying the
thousands of speakeasies across the city
with their manufactured beer their
profits skyrocketed into a multi-million
dollar business and its very height
Capone would make over 60 million
dollars a year and he spared no expense
in buying protection from the law these
ranged from bribing cops and the beat to
prohibition agents judges even the
Republican mayor William Hale Thompson
the scale of public officials that he
was able to line in his pockets arguably
made Chicago one of the most corrupt
cities in America each of them turned a
blind eye to his bootlegging rackets
even at the risk of public safety
Capone's rise to power was not
unchallenged although the Italian mafia
controlled much of the Southside Chicago
the Northside was mostly ruled by the
Irish at first they came to an agreement
to sell their booze in each other's
territory and share the profits but
eventually the treaty was broken and a
five-year war and seed labeled by the
press as the beer Wars rival gangsters
battled each other for ultimate power
with drive-bys and shootouts become a
regular occurrence in public streets as
the body-cam made national headlines the
police did little to contain the
violence judges and juries were bought
off as usual even as things escalated
the beer Wars reached his bloody
conclusion on a day that would shocked
and appalled the American people On
February 14 1929 Italian gangsters
disguised as policemen rounded up seven
leaders
the Northside gangs hierarchy and mowed
them down with machine-gun fire at the
time it happened Al Capone was on
holiday in Florida but everyone knew
that he was behind it it would come to
be known as the st. Valentine's Day
Massacre in the short term no one was
arrested and the North Side gang
crumbled into the dust leaving the
entire city of Chicago in Capone's hands
but in the long term the st. Valentine's
Day Massacre would proved to be the
turning point in Capone's career with
President Hoover and the federal
government decided that they had enough
of the defiant mobster and his obvious
flaunting of the law declaring him
public enemy number one they worked on a
plan that would finally bring him down
for good
[Music]
whenever I decide to review a historical
movie I always have to ask myself how
much did its accuracy affects my viewing
experience what do I do if I enjoyed the
movie when I first watched it but then
found out later that most of it wasn't
true or indeed vice-versa
what if I hated the movie and then found
out that for the most part it was
accurate it's already happened to me a
couple of times in this Channel's
history for example I loved the movie
Gladiator but even I have to admit that
from a historical angle the movies full
of shit and then there was Oliver
Stone's Alexander an awful movie that
bored me to tears but it was for the
most part historically accurate now I
have to admit that when I first watched
The Untouchables I enjoyed it
it's a well-written movie with a great
cast and I set in a fascinating time
period and I'm sure that many of you
feel the same way as well but
unfortunately as a historical movie it's
mostly inaccurate and bears little
resemblance to what actually happened
the basic premise of the untouchables is
that a prohibition agent called Eliot
Ness creates an elite team of honest
cops and together they single-handedly
brought down Al Capone and put him away
behind bars just that alone the main
plot of the movie is not the way how
went down so over the course of this
chapter I'm going to go step by step and
point out its biggest and accuracies so
you can get a clearer picture of what
actually happened and from time to time
I also point out what the movie gets
right I guess the best place we should
start would be with The Untouchables
themselves let's begin with Eliot Ness
when we're first introduced to Ness we
see that he is a family man with the
loving wife and the young daughter but
by 1930 the real Ness had only been
married for a year and he didn't have
children this may seem trivial but the
reason why the filmmakers made this
change is so Ness has an emotional
attachment to the case if you can
remember at the beginning of the movie
we see another little girl the same age
as his daughter died an explosion at a
speakeasy on Capone's orders which by
the way I'm 100% sure happened either
because by 1930 the beer wars were
already finished and had resulted in Al
Capone's victory
it wasn't the death of a little girl
that convinced the federal government to
come after Capone but the st.
Valentine's Day Massacre in
in 29 but I guess that the main reason
they gave Nessa daughter is so that his
situation could be even more dire when
the gangsters come and threaten this
family
nice to have a family yes it is
and she take care see the nursing
happens too even though nest didn't have
a daughter the threats made against him
and his wife were very real indeed they
were the last-ditch efforts made by
Capone to intimidate nests into giving
up his investigation but before he did
that Capone tried the usual tactic of
bribery which we do see in the movie
when Arthur slugworth hads nessa manila
envelope now an interesting thing to
know is that the envelope contains two
thousand dollars in cash which was the
annual wage of a prohibition officer
back then and Capone was willing to pay
that amount every week and since almost
everyone in Chicago took bribes back
then the fact that Eliot Ness and his
men didn't is what made them stand out
your fellows are untouchable is that the
thing no one can get to you yeah you
took a pawn hey everyone I'll see him in
hell but just because Ness refused to
take bribes didn't make him squeaky
clean the scene where he tells the
Chicago police to stop drinking because
it's against the law is a little
hypocritical considering that the real
man was a heavy drinker himself next up
we have the Italian cop George Stone who
is also called Giuseppe Bathory Stone is
a completely fictional character and
I've been unable to find evidence of the
untouchables ever having any Italians on
the team my guess is that the filmmakers
needed at least one Italian good guy so
they wouldn't feel too one-sided with
the villains then we have Jimmy Malone
who is performed superbly by Sean
Connery he is undoubtedly my favorite
character in the movie even though Sean
Connery has the worst Irish accents I've
ever heard albeit slightly more
convincing than his Spanish one in
Highlander I'm not Spanish I'm Egyptian
anyway the character of Jimmy Malone is
the most interesting to me because he's
an old beat cop who knows the streets of
Chicago and he takes Eliot Ness under
his wing so you have a mentor students
relationship going on between them sadly
Jimmy Malone is also a fictional
character but he does seem to be loosely
based on a real guy called Michael
Malone who works undercover agent for
the IRS but what's Malone was working on
had nothing to do what the untouchables
were doing so Eliot Ness and Michael
Malone never met what Michael Malone had
done the successfully infiltrate
Capone's in as
Circle and kept tabs and all his illegal
money-making schemes and it was his
investigation that was crucial in
Capone's downfall and had nothing to do
with the prohibition case the
untouchables are working on which brings
me to the final guy on nessus team Oscar
Wallace right from his introduction
Wallace pitches his idea to Eliot Ness
of what he thinks will be the key to
putting away Al Capone
he has not filed a return since 1926 a
return an income tax return at first
Ness dismisses the idea and focuses his
investigation on Component bootlegging
operation but eventually he comes around
and sees that arresting the mobster for
income tax evasion really is the most
effective way however the character
Oscar Wallace didn't exist but he does
seem to be heavily inspired by the real
historical figure Frank J Wilson and
Wallace does resemble him a little bit
Frank Wilson was the real hero brought
down Capone not Eliot Ness
he was an IRS agent who was tasked to
dig up all the files he could possibly
find and linked the undeclared Millions
between Capone and his gang throughout
his investigation he stayed in his
stuffy office and read countless
documents before finding ledgers that
incriminated Capone himself
it was his investigation and that of
Michael Malone's
that contributed the most in Capone's
prosecution but the reason why their
efforts are credited by Eliot Ness in
the movie is because bookkeeping and
tedious paperwork is nowhere near as
exciting as a prohibition team getting
into gunfights and taking on the Chicago
mafia but even that never happened not a
single member of the untouchables was
killed during their investigation nor do
they ever travel to the u.s. Canadian
border and get into a Wild West
shoot-out with a bunch of mobsters
smuggling in Canadian whiskey which by
the way never made sense to me I'm not
entirely convinced whether the Canadian
Mounties would risk their lives
confiscating smuggled whiskey since
alcohol was completely legal in Canada I
mean I can't say for certain though but
I would love to read your comments about
this there's also the scene where Eliot
Ness takes on the real-life gangster
Frank Bitsey it starts off with ness
spots and is he carrying a pistol in
court and
summons a police officer to escort him
out to be disarmed now a cool thing to
know is that one of Capone's henchmen
was removed from court for carrying a
gun but it wasn't Frank Nitti so out in
the hall Nitti shows the two there he
has a permit for his pistol and what I
thought was a really nice touch is that
the permit was signed by William Hale
Thompson the mayor of Chicago this
didn't happen of course but it still
feels authentic since the real William
Thompson was deep in Capone's pockets
and is remembered as one of the most
corrupt politicians in American history
so anyway when Frank Nitti gets his gun
back an altercation between him and
nests erupts into a rooftop chase scene
that ultimately concludes with nests
straight-up murdering the man by
chucking him off a building into a
parked car and then there says my
favorite line in the entire movie where
is Nitti was in the car
as much as I would love that scene to be
true it sadly isn't Eliot Ness never
killed Frank ditzy nitty didn't die
until 1943 when he committed suicide so
that's another exciting bit in the movie
that was made up for dramatic effect the
same goes for the final big shootout I'm
talking about the scene with the
untouchables and some mobsters get into
a gunfight at Union Station whilst a
baby in a pram starts tumbling down the
stairs the scene is actually inspired by
the Odessa steps sequence from the 1925
Soviet silent film Battleship Potemkin
if he put both scenes side by side you
could see it's a great homage to one of
the most important films ever made so if
all the best bits in the film didn't
happen what did the real Untouchables do
exactly and why weren't they the ones to
bring down Al Capone
well when the federal government decided
to originally go on the offensive they
did so by planning a two-pronged attack
one was by investigating Capone's
tax evasion through the IRS and the
other would be by targeting his
bootlegging operations with the bureau
prohibition for the untouchables mainly
dead was rate suspected breweries and
destroy any illegal liquor they found at
first these rights were successful and
provokes Capone into ordering a kill
order in them I want you to get this
fuck where he freaks I want you to find
his fancy boy Eliot Ness I want him dead
I want his family dead
I want his house back to the ground I
want to go to middle not a palace it
wasn't long before the success of the
raids and the recognition by the press
began to get into Eliot Ness his head
and in a ludicrous fashion he would call
journalists beforehand to let them know
which brewery they were gonna hit so he
could have his picture taken right
before they burst in through the door as
expected some of these journalists were
corrupt as well and they would give the
mob a heads-up when to clear the place
and yet despite the hostility between
the two it is widely believed the
neither nest nor Capone ever met in
person there was never a confrontation
at the Lexington hotel or in the
courtroom moving away from the
untouchables for a bit I'd like to
briefly cover the film's portrayal Al
Capone and I'm glad to say that they did
a pretty good job Capone really did
reside at the luxury Lexington hotel and
he did brought his power by speaking to
the press about his
food lacking rackets he not he bragged
about it but he also played the victim
which just what essentially made him
into such a public figure and then
there's the famous banquet scene where
Capone beats one of his henchmen to
death with a baseball bat now I have to
admit it that when I first watched it I
thought was made of just to show how
evil he was but surprisingly this scene
is based on a real event except it
wasn't one guy Capone killed with a bat
but to what allegedly happened was that
two of Capone's hit men one being Albert
Anselmi
and the other John Scalise were hatching
a plot to murder their boss and take
over his empire learning about this
Capone invited the conspirators to a
feast in their honor with all the other
Capo's then halfway through the meal he
and his men hold down the traitors as he
beat them half to death with a baseball
bat then they were finished off later
with a few gunshots to the head and the
final inaccuracy I think deserves a
mention is the scene where the judge
switches the jury halfway through the
trial in the movie Nest discovers a list
showing that all the jurors have been
bribed by Capone and he tells the judge
but the judge refuses to accept it as
evidence until Ness lies about it and
says that his name was on the list too
now whilst is true that the entire jury
was bright for the Capone case judge
Wilkinson certainly wasn't he had
correctly anticipated that jury would be
bribed and right before the trial began
he switched the juries so as you can see
there are more things that the
untouchables got wrong than it did get
right the film was more interested in
glamourizing The Legend of Eliot Ness
they were revealing the true story
normally they would frustrate me as a
history buff but in the end I genuinely
believe that these creative liberties
still felt within the spirits of the
period they didn't stretch things so far
as to betrayed the source material of
course I would prefer if they tried to
take them closer to the truth
but the inaccuracies weren't enough to
infuriate me in the end
overall I'm willing to admit that it is
a fun movie but it's clearly meant for a
casual audience if that isn't a problem
for you then I highly recommend you
check it out
well that about wraps it up my name is
Nick Hodges and thanks for watching
history buffs and remember if you like
the show help the channel grow if you
wish to support history buffs that you
can now do so at patreon and as always
let me know in the comment section what
you thought about the untouchables and
of course what historical movie should I
review next in the meantime check out
the history buffs Twitter and Facebook
page for new updates until then I'll see
you next time
[Music]
you